---
layout: post
title: Grand-Canonical Monte Carlo Acceptance Rule Derivations
author: Arthur York
---

# Grand-Canonical Monte Carlo Simulation

`PorousMaterials.jl` uses a method similar to the Buffon's needle problem for estimating the interactions between adsorbate gasses and a structure. By exploring the potential statespace and then calculating the average, we can generate an approximation for both of these problems. However, in the Buffon's needle problem we made the assumption that the statespace is uniformly distributed, i.e. there is an equal probability of each $(x, \theta)$ pair occuring. By examining figure 3 in the Buffon's needle post, it is easy to see that the outcome of throwing the needle is evenly distributed across the entire statespace. This is not true of gasses in porous structures.

The statespace for this molecular model is based on the number of total adsorbate molecules in the system, and their positions, shown in equation 1. These states should not occur with equal probability in order to accurately simulate the real world process. For instance, having millions of overlapping atoms, and having an energetically balanced system should not occur with the same probability. To favor realistic permutations, `PorousMaterials.jl` uses the grand-canonical Monte Carlo algorithms for exploring the statespace of gasses inside porous materials.

\begin{equation}
R := \{N, \vec{x}_1, \cdots, \vec{x}_N\}
\end{equation}

The simulation works by proposing one of three trial moves: insertion, deletion, or translation. Then acceptance rules are used to calculate the percent probability that the move is accepted based on the change in energy. A very large change in energy (potentially due to overlapping atoms) will never be accepted, a slight increase in energy will sometimes be accepted, and a decrease in energy will always be accepted. This allows the program to examine the entire statespace, but only travel to realistic areas. Having a small chance of increasing the energy in the system at each step prevents the model from becoming stuck in a local minima and gives it the chance to properly explore physically viable states. At the end of the simulation, information about the visited states (such as energy and number of adsorbates) can be averaged to form an estimate for the system. 

# Deriving the Acceptance Rules

The grand-canonical Monte Carlo acceptance rules are based on the following equation (ref 3).

\begin{equation}
f_L({\mathbf r}_1,{\mathbf r}_2 ..., {\mathbf r}_N) \propto \frac{\Lambda^{-3N}}{N!} e^{\beta \mu N} e^{-\beta U_N}\qquad\qquad\text{(2)}
\end{equation}
